Welcome, everybody. It's amazing to be back. It's amazing to be back in Brussels in person
and see that many people here looking for an answer to a question, can we do an open
source chip design in 45 minutes? And to save you all the hassle of actually just listening
through this talk, yes, we can. Thanks. It's been great. Enjoy Brussels. Or if you want
to know more about how that actually can work, stay here. So we're going to look at technology.
Obviously, this is fast. Then we're going to look at tools and processes, how to build
an open source chip. We were looking at community because this is faster than we want to talk
about the people and communities behind all of these efforts. And we will predict the
future. Let's see how that goes and we'll see some examples of where that potentially
went wrong in the past. So, standing in front of you today is Philip. I'm a hardware developer
and I've been doing a fair amount of software. I've been involved in open source for a fair
amount of time. I gave my first first and target just looked 11 years ago. You find
some contact information there. And I'm currently working at, by now, at this company here,
IBM doing chip verification for high-end mainframe CPUs. So that brings all the new
together, actually. And I'm also maintainer of the open source COCODB project and we'll
get into that in a second. Previously, I was working at Lorisk and OpenTitan. Again, to
buzzwords just for you to Google if you want to. So OpenTitan is a security chip, fully
open source, that you actually can get involved just like any other software community. I'm
here today representing the FOSI Foundation and this is a foundation there to kind of
steward and take care of the open source chip design movement. It's based on individuals
and it's a non-for-profit registered in the UK. Also has been around for quite a while
and was initially born out of the open risk movement that did a open source processor
CPU core back, probably, I don't know how many years by now, 10, 15, something like
that, before risk five was a thing. So that's it for the introduction. Let's go into the
functionality. How do we build a chip? There are two main things that we need. First, we
need to think about, we have an idea, obviously that's where we start, but then at some point
we need to implement the functionality. We do that, looks similar to a regular programming
task. So this is the logic design part. And that one is pretty well understood these days.
Also an open source. We'll see why that is the case and why that has been thriving for
many, many years now. The second part is the back end or the physics or the real world,
the thing that actually gets us closer to not having a description of what our hardware
could do, but actually a real physical chip that we can then potentially hold in our hands.
So this was the part that was trickier so far. And again, we'll get into more of the
details of that. But these two things are the ones we need. We need the logic, the functionality,
and we need the implementation to make this a real thing.
As in so many cases, the terms are overloaded and fuzzy and ambiguous. So for my purpose
here I'm going to use the term front end for the logic part design. And then there will
be a back end as well. So if you're coming from the web world or the JavaScript world,
that probably means something very different to you. So if you have a front end designer
and I'll be under potentially doing JavaScript, because that's what they do as well, or they're
potentially doing chips, you don't know. Has led to interesting conversations in the past,
I must say. So the front end, I kind of briefly alluded to that. It's just like programming.
So there are different levels of programming languages and hierarchies. There is, for example,
high level synthesis starting at the top where you, well, if you would buy such a high level
synthesis tool that would probably tell you you start with an idea and then maybe an algorithm,
something that is fancy, and then just run the tool and you get your chip out of it immediately,
kind of done. Some of them will sell you tools that allow you to start with a, well, in marketing
it sounds like an arbitrarily complex C or C++ code base and just run that high level
synthesis tool and you get a chip design out of it. Nothing, no human involved, works perfectly.
Now anybody who has C and C or C++ code bases will kind of attest this is probably not how
reality works. And it doesn't. Beyond that, again, the boundaries are slightly fuzzy. There are high
level languages that make it ideally more convenient to write a chip. And then at the lowest level
almost, there's always system very lock or very lock and Ph.D.L. Again, system very lock being
kind of slightly misleading in terminology. So system very lock is the current standard for
hardware description languages that was previously called Verilog. Some others use it as system
very lock being the verification language, where Verilog is the design language. Again,
let's make it as confusing as possible. It's the language called system very lock these days. The
alternative is Ph.D.L. Again, just like the C and more or less the C or C++ of the hardware world.
And below there, that's typically not a programming language, just a typically Verilog as well,
just a lower level representation of the same thing that is the net list, which is effectively
a C of ands and ors and then connected by wires. So that's representing your logic. So these are
the kind of programming languages that you would use and we'll get into a couple examples in a
second. And then obviously, there's all the other stuff. Test frameworks, build tools, you need to
have a proper conversation about a build tool, otherwise it's not a real programming environment.
I mean, who are we if we can't argue endlessly about build tools? They're developer productivity
tools. It's actually one of the areas where open source really shines compared to some of the
commercial offerings and simulators. And again, we'll get into those in a second. So let's have a
look at a couple examples. We want to do open source after all. So hardware description
language is that we can choose from. And the list is quite long, even though it kind of narrows
down quickly once you kind of look deeper. So there's system Verilog and Verilog. So this is
a IEEE standard. You can download the standard just like the C standard. And this is effectively
the most commonly used language to do hardware design. It's quite old, which is not per se much
of a problem, but it has been continuously updated. The other problem about system Verilog and Verilog
is kind of years come and go and programming concepts and ideas come and go as well. The
problem is if your language stays around that long, you just add everything. So if you look at the
system Verilog standards, it's huge. Probably not as huge as the C++ standard. But it will have some
interesting corner cases if you look at that. And that has interesting side effects, because now you
have a fair amount of tools. And we'll get to that in a second, how many tools you actually need to
evolve to get a hardware design working. So all of those need to understand ideally the same subset
of system Verilog. And also kind of interpret it the same way. So that's not always the case. That's
why hardware designers who are per se already quite conservative in the tools they're choosing,
will end up with a very kind of old school subset of Verilog that you're in there and allowed to use.
BHDL is another option. Same story there, just slightly different. The Verilog community is much
larger. And especially if you're looking at producing kind of real ASIC chip designs, you're going to
look at Verilog mostly. But then program links as said coming in. So there are some interesting new
ones up there as well. There's BlueSpec. There are a fair amount of Python-based HDLs. And some of
them are more low-level than others. So there is MyGen, Amaranth, and MyHDL and a couple others. So
this is, this by the way, no. It doesn't need to be complete. And it isn't complete. And there are
a number of hardware description languages or programming languages that are based on functional
programming languages. Spinal HDL, Chisel, and Clash for example. Chisel for example being quite
often used these days because, I don't know if you first heard about RISC-V. Let's maybe do this. Raise your hand.
So RISC-V is a open source instructions and architecture. So like the x86 is an instruction set
architecture or ARM v7, v8 is an instruction set architecture. And then kind of then was developed
in Berkeley originally and they also developed a hardware language called Chisel. So the initial
RISC-V core implementation, the Rocket core is implemented in Chisel. And since that's open
source and widely used, kind of Chisel also spread more widely. So you'll see that. And then there is a,
I'm not quite sure how new or old it is, the circuit LLVM effort that kind of tries to build a LLVM
based compiler infrastructure to then place hardware languages or other pieces of functionality on top of.
I've actually not seen that many kind of useful tools coming out of that LLVM based middle layer.
So we'll see what the future brings in that regard. So we choose the programming languages. And then
the next thing you want to do if you actually want to build a chip is ideally not write everything
from scratch. So you reuse, you integrate existing things and they're typically always called IP cores
in that world. So there are a couple options that makes it easier to integrate. So there is no
unfortunately central package manager or something like that, like a cargo or an NPM or something like
that that you would have in the newer software world. So but what you have instead to do is more or less
Google for whatever you might need. And you might find an abandoned Git repository or a
sit drop somewhere that contains what you're looking for. And often it comes with, oh, this has been
potentially taped out. So a chip has been produced out of that and it's stable. So we're not going to touch it again.
So many of these kind of IP cores are considered stable because as soon as you've used them once,
you don't want to touch them again. So you rarely have a kind of fancy community around those cores.
It's just it's there. You use it and then you're on your own. So that was and still is this website
called OpenCores, which was kind of a directory for open source hardware blocks. It's been
unmaintained for quite a while, but it's still there. So if you're looking for cores, it might be a good
option. But again, don't expect that much of an active community around these offerings. And I guess
the best that's why the slide is quite empty option is the school and you'll find something. So now that
we have put together a logic design, we have written some stuff on our own. We choose in the programming
languages nobody else has been using before and we added some IP cores that nobody was maintaining.
So now we want to see if it actually works. I mean, it feels unlikely if I phrase it like that,
but the chances are it actually does. So we need to verify it somehow better or not so good. We
potentially document it. Nah, let's not do that. We want to make it look pretty. I mean, that's what
we spend most of our time. Don't we? I mean, it's two tabs or spaces or indent here or indent there.
It needs to look pretty. Even it doesn't work. So that's something we need to do. And that's
something the open source community was always fantastic about. And that's clearly something
we're bringing to the world of commercial chip design. We need to simulate it because at this
point, we're just doing logic design. So we don't have anything, we don't have a chip yet. So we
somehow need to see what it actually does. And we potentially can run it on FPG. And I'll get to
that in a second. So let's have a look at a couple buzzwords here of what is possible these days in
open source chip design world. Simulators, we start with that one. There are kind of three main
simulators. And you see that they're main simulators because they have a logo. There is a fourth
simulator that's rarely used. NBC doesn't have a logo. So I think that indicates what's going on.
You also see by the style of the logos, what are the older projects? At least it's slightly misleading,
I must say. And so on the top right, we have Ecos Verilog, which is an event-based Verilog
simulator. It has been around for quite a while. It's stable and it works really well. It's widely
used. But it doesn't support much of the more modern system Verilog features. And it's not that
fast. It's sufficiently fast for smaller designs. And it's kind of the standard choice if you just
want to get started. Ecos Verilog works here. If you're looking for a BHDL option, there is GHDL,
I think the most actively maintained BHDL simulator, it says. And there is Verilog in the middle,
which is slightly different because it simulates Verilog as well. The name gives it away, I would
say. But it's a cycle-accurate simulator. So without going into too much of the details here,
if you have a real chip design, you clock it and then you get one clock pass per clock. That's
ridiculous. But that's the only times when Verilator kind of reevaluates things that are going on. In
an event-based simulator, you get a slightly different behavior. Either way, Verilator behaves
pretty much like a real chip would do afterwards. And it's a very, very active community. And it's
typically based around the synthesizable subset of Verilog. Because that's kind of what it targets.
It targets only the logic that you then want to bring on a chip and not so much the system Verilog
that you can use to actually write a test-bencher verification framework around it.
Now verification frameworks, I just mentioned that. Who has heard of UVM? The one up here.
Couple ones. Okay. So UVM is an interesting one. It's a system Verilog verification methodology.
And already, it's a methodology that kind of breathes this air of being designed by a committee.
And that's how it looks. It's effectively a class library, a framework of classes and instructions
on how to use them and when to use them to actually verify a chip. So write a test-bench,
more or less. So that's your Google test of Verilog, if you wish to. And there are a couple
other options. There is, and I mentioned that in my work there. So I'm going to mention that
prominently. There's COCADB which gives you a way to write a test-bench in Python that is then
testing your hardware logic. There's OSVVN for BHDL designs. And there is on the top just one of
the further options. Symbiosis, if you don't want to do simulation-based verification, but you want
to do formal verification. So you want to prove that certain things are happening or not happening.
So this is then effectively using a SAT solver behind the scenes to prove some things can be done
or can't be done. So that's a very different verification approach and works very well for
some problems, but not for all of them. And so you typically, if you're kind of trying to gain
confidence in your design, you definitely go for some simulation-based verification, so simulation
based testing. And then you maybe throw in some formal around some specific areas. And while I'm
putting these here, so this is kind of the way to do verification, not new, but what we see here
that we have a fair amount of options in open source that are very, very high quality and ready
to be used. So that's great. Build systems, and I need to mention the first one first. Who has
heard of Fusuck? Oh, a couple of ones. So there's this guy called Olaf Shingran, quite active on
Twitter as well, and he's always writing award-winning software. So he started that initially when he
just saw a tool that apparently has gained an award, but he couldn't find the award that it was
awarded. So from then on, every tool he's writing is award-winning, even though it has never won any
awards. Actually, I think Fusuck has won one or two awards by now. So I think that's something we
only to copy. Just make sure that we always say our software is award-winning, and from there on,
it's just much better. So Fusuck is a build system for hardware designs, and Edelize is a build
system backend to make kind of the hardware design put together and feed that to a variety of
different tools that are involved. So just like driving your compiler. There is V-Unit, a regression
manager. Well, okay, another maybe interesting term I'm saying regression manager here. So a
regression in the software world would be something was working, and then it would broke it somehow,
so kind of functionality degraded in quality. A regression in the hardware world would be
somebody just running a fair amount of tests. So effectively, you know, I believe CIE would be a
regression, just to add confusing terminology. And there are a fair amount of other options for
build systems. Again, just Google them and then fight about it, obviously. We talked about white
space before, and when you're done with your fighting about your build system, you obviously
need to fight about your right style guide to use for your programming languages. So we have come
accustomed in the software world to there being kind of Clang format and other Go format and other
enforcing or not so much enforcing auto format is there. If you look at a very low code in VHDL code,
you see there is no formatter. And you see often there is kind of no taste either. So
it just looks awful. And if you look through code, then everything looks different, which
isn't that much of a problem in the commercial chip development world, because you own something,
it's kind of it's John's core. So this is kind of the piece of code that John is working on,
only he needs to be able to touch it, which is then up to John, however, they want to
kind of format their code. And I've done that for 20 or 30 or 40 years, so they just
have their in-house style that you also see changing over time. That's not something that
we kind of find normal in kind of these days of software development. So there was an effort,
and it still is an effort to bring formatting, linting, and language server integration,
so that gives you your Visual Studio code integration or your other kinds of integrations.
And variable is the tool to look for there. There is very little lint, part of that very
later simulator that I've shown before, and it actually does more static analysis jobs as well.
And there are a couple other options to choose from. And mostly mentioning the
the very log part here, you'll find that, because that's what I'm most familiar with, but I'm very
sure there is an equivalent BHDL kind of option for many of these things as well. And if you know
them, by the way, just raise your hand and we'll just add it right away. So let's have a look at
just one or two examples. So this is a don't hate to read it in full. So this is a piece of Verilog
on top, assigning something based on a ternary statement. And think about Verilog, it's statically
but it's not statically typed, but it still is easy to assign, for example, 32 bits to 7 bits
all the other way around. And Verilog will, well, most Verilog tools will be, well, very much
ignorant of that fact and just strip off some bits that are not used or padded in some way.
So what you would expect from many languages where the compiler just tells you, well,
this is just bullshit that you've written here. In Verilog you need some further tools to do that,
actually. And variator-lynt is one of the options here. Just a random example of where you actually
need insight into the variables and the constants that are being used. With variable, we now also
can do something that we also know quite well from a software world. It's just have style
links and stuff like that run in CI and actually give you feedback right away. And for example,
here I'm having a screenshot from an open type repository, a pull request, where one of these
parts actually gives you immediately feedback on, well, that's trading space, that's kind of the
most boring example. But also things like rules about naming certain constructs. We don't need
to go into the details of what's happening here. And I think I've seen some people from Ant Micro
here before, as you can see. Where are they? There they are. That's written there. So if you have
questions about variable, I think the people up there are to blame and to ask questions.
Well, I've done a great job. So let's keep it at that for the moment. Front end,
we're doing great in terms of chip design. So we have all the tools. We've seen, like,
that the slides only always had a subset of tools that we can use. So Frontend is doing great and
has been for ages. I mean, one thing I would love to see is that we just stop reinventing Verilog
parsing. It's a huge language. And we have so many tools that all think they can parse Verilog. And
they just can't. They just really can't. I mean, everybody thinks they just strip out that part of
the standard and somebody uses it and you get these weird pipelines that just don't work anymore.
So maybe a unified front end at some point in time. And I know there have been a couple attempts
to actually do that. And it just leads to that situation that you now have one more front end
to care about, as always. Okay. We have our logic design. We can run it on the FPGA. Sure. And
in the FPGA world, there are kind of two main manufacturers of FPGAs and there's something
else. So who does not know what an FPGA is? Okay. Very small number. So it's a field programmable
gate array. So it's effectively a chip that you can reprogram. Let's put it like that in very
simple terms. And normally you would use the tool that the vendor provides you that would be in,
how would they name this day? So it would be Vivado for Xilinx, now some other company, or
Quarters for Altera, now Intel. Whatever. Just get bored. Come on. Stop it. Or if you don't want to
use those close tools, you can use Symbiosis or, well, formerly Simbyflow or now F4FPGA.
And it gives you a reverse engineered way to actually target Xilinx 7 series FPGAs. So these
are the pretty most common FPGAs. And actually do full designs, full open source, using only
open source tools, and get them runnable on an FPGA. The problem there always was that kind of
the programming instructions, the way how to kind of structure a program to put it on an FPGA wasn't
known. That's what they reverse engineered and then put together kind of various open source tools
that then allow you to actually target FPGAs. So the thing is FPGAs are pretty much like if you're
trying to build a phone, but the only thing you can do is actually build that. It's nice.
It's functionality. It's kind of similar. But it's pixely, you know? It's just not the right thing.
And I actually outsourced that work to my niece and nephew. So it's just, well, that's what we want,
don't we? We want kind of open source silicon. We want a real chip. We want this thingy, not that.
So how can we do that? We need the back end. We need the physical implementation.
That adds a whole lot of new complexity, of course. And that's where things become interesting.
And what we want is we want to go from RTL, so that's your register transfer layer,
a layer level. So that's your VeriLock to GDS2. That's a very old data format that you then send
to a company that produces your chips. So that's a fad. So we want a RTL to GDS2 flow. And I have
an example of one here. So we start with VeriLock on the top. We do centers. And I'm not going to
explain them all in detail here, because otherwise we're going to be here for a long time. But just
to demystify some of the acronyms in here. So we do our centers. That gives us our netlist.
We do a static timing analysis. So to see if we have put potentially too much logic
after each other so that you can't clock it anymore, that you only can clock it to
kilohertz or something like that. That's what the static timing analysis does in the first one.
So there is DFT, Design for Test. If you have that chip, you're going to have a hard time
looking inside it. So you want some test structures inside your chip that allow you to observe what's
going on. So these are typically scan chains, something that JTAG was and still is used for,
apart from the many other things that JTAG is being used for. But that's what DFT does. And
these scan chains are automatically inserted normally for all or most registers.
And then you have that. You still have a very locked description. And then you do
flow planning, placement, clock tree synthesis, optimization, and global routing. So in the end
you get a number of transistors and that you connect them somehow and you optimize them
in a way that kind of minimizes or maximizes power or performance or area, depending on what
you're looking for. And all the things that we've skipped over so far that are now relevant in the
physical world. For example, if you have that clock that goes to your chip, you always need to
make sure, obviously also need to make sure that it actually gets distributed across the chip. So
you just have a single pin potentially where it comes in, but it needs to be everywhere. So you
have that clock tree that you need to insert somehow. Something we don't need to worry about,
for example, or not that much worry about if you're doing an FPGA design or a simulation
because that's something FPGA vendor has already done for us. So we are able to kind of ignore
many of these things when we're just doing kind of FPGAs before. And then since we're back in
the physical world and you need to manufacture them, we have antenna diodes that we need to insert.
And after we've done that much processing, we're not quite sure what we got. So what we want to
make sure is at this point that we actually know that still the original design is what we did.
So we do a logic equivalence check. That's the LEC here. And then we do detailed routing,
RC extraction, and other timing analysis. And finally, we're at GDS2 streaming. So that's when
we do the final writing. And then we could be at our GDS2. Easy, isn't it? So just need to kind
of put those tools up together. Done. Beautiful. Why didn't we do that ages ago? I guess we were
too lazy to just do that. Well, the reason is a different one. I just skipped out one part of the
picture. And that's one input up here. That's the PDK, the process design kit. And this is something
you get from a fab. And if you don't get it, you don't get it. You're not going to do any of that.
And I was standing here in 2016, a couple years ago. These were some of the slides.
Style change as well. So we have the process design kit. We are getting there standard cell
libraries. We get a fair amount of design rules. Like if you have ever done kind of PCB manufacturing,
printed circuit boards, you also get a number of rules that you need to obey so that they can
actually manufacture it. It's typically not that long that list. And if you want to fab a chip,
the list is significantly longer. Electric good parameters. So you get it from the foundry. And
you need to sign an NDA for that. That's where we stopped in 2016. That's where we stopped in 2017.
And that's why we said back then, you can't do it as a hobbyist. So just there's no way of doing
that. There were some companies who did it. And low risk was one of them. If you are kind of big
enough, they still allow you to sign that NDA. But that's where we stopped. And then there was
this talk. This was two years ago now. It's 2020, I think. So that's even more. Yeah, let's say two
years plus minus. And where Tim Ansell working at Google was presenting the Skywater PDK. So this is
for the first time ever that, well, at least in the last 20 years, let's put it this way,
a process design kit. So the rules from Foundry were open source. And they are available on GitHub
right there. So let's think and switch over here. Can I? No, I can't. Let's keep it up here. So yes,
you can download them from GitHub. So now you solve that one problem. You actually can now
manufacture a fully open source chip because you do have these rules. The downside here is this is
a 130 nanometer PDK. If you're looking at current three, five nanometer,
chips in your mobile phone, potentially. So when was 130? 130 was this time.
So these are Pentium 4, so 130 nanometer roughly. So that's a net burst architecture.
AMD roughly at the same time. So that's around 2002, where that technology was first introduced.
Maybe you still have some of those PCs actually around. But nonetheless,
this process is still being manufactured. Otherwise, Foundry wouldn't be able to produce
something out of that. So they still have processing lines that actually use that flow.
So the other thing that was happening is that, boobies said, not only we talked to that Foundry
and they gave us this PDK away, we're also funding a shuttle. So that is effectively a
cost effective way to produce chips together with others on a single wafer. And I said we're doing
a couple of those every year. And if you submit a open source design, you get that manufactured for
free, really kind of free as in no cost at all, using only open source tools. So free as in real
free as well. So that for the first time made it possible for everybody who only has internet access
and doesn't need any cash at all to get a chip manufactured. So these are obviously not volume
chips. So these are kind of experimental chips for you to actually give it a try. But you can
for the first time ever, you can. So this was a old Arctic load found that from these 130 nanometer
chips, you know, kind of in a couple of years, they said that was in 2000, we should be able
to reach eight to 10 gigahertz on slightly better note. So I think that was around 70 nanometers.
So if they said that would be possible, I mean, we are only like 18 years behind that prediction.
Now, let's see what we in the open source actually can do. And probably not going to reach this eight
gigahertz. But there's a fair amount of room in those old process notes still to be optimized and
still to be explored. So let's do some exploring, actually. We've seen that picture before of that
flow. You can get that flow very easily. You do a get clone of the open lane repository, you
CD into it, you run make, make test and make mount and that gives you a Docker container.
And that Docker container is something I have open right here. So this is the open lane Docker
container. And since we are reasonably short on time, I'm not gonna run it in full. So I
did run the flow. So this is a trivial design. So that's SPM, a serial parallel multiplier.
So this is a very small piece of code that we will then turn into a chip design. It's part of
the standard demo. So I guess you can give that a try as well. So let's have a look.
The process, I think it runs through in a minute or after two minutes for that trivial design.
For larger design, it takes an hour for a S core and a full SLC taking a couple 10, 20 hours,
depending on how you're doing. It's still not the end of the world. So that was boring somewhere,
isn't it? Let's have a look at the output right away. So it comes with a
GDS viewer. So GDS is the output format, as we said. And just starting from that very log
and using only open source components, you get the full GDS. And that is confusing because
physics are confusing. So let's see if we can get rid of some things here. I'll just have a look at
the left side first. So we see the different cells that are being used. So the sky water foundry
provides us with a number of ands and ors and nots and other things optimized for different
process corners. And they get chosen and then inserted into that design. So let's get rid of
a bit of the stuff that we actually need for physics. So decaps, who needs those? Filers,
nobody said either. So that already gives us a slightly better picture. Maybe we can get rid of
some of those metal layers, the connectivity. I mean, who needs that? And we see we can get closer
to the actual interesting parts. So that is effectively your file that you sent to the foundry.
And you can do that as set free of cost using the chartered program or if you don't want to use that,
you can also pay a company called eFabulous to then fab that for you. As that using only the
open source tools. Since we are really short on time, here are the things that you can have
look and play with. You also, if you don't want to install anything locally, you can have a look
at that link. That gives you a Jupyter notebook, a online way to just actually play around and just
in your browser write some VHDL or Verilog actually in that case and synthesizes and have a look at
the GDS2 in the end. Only in your browser, nothing else needed. There is a project called
Tiny Tape Out where you can get a very, very small chip kind of manufactured and learn how to do it.
And they have a very, very nice GitHub action set up. And I need to show that because it's just
a fantastic. So apart from kind of you have your Verilog and then in the end your GDS, you also get
a built-in 3D GDS viewer that allows you to zoom through your design and see the metal layers,
see everything in there and let's get rid of some of the, oops, there was a wrong button. Oh,
how can I help you? Some of the layers, so that was remove the details and the decaps and then
remove the cell geometry as well. So that's how your standard cells know. And we can actually
look at them and see what they are and also look at the different layers. So that's really cool.
And that shows if you have now only open source tools, you can do all that. You can do that
in a GitHub action where before when you actually had licenses and license servers and all that
crap that comes with software that you need to buy for a lot of money, it's not just expensive,
it's also pain to use and stuff like that would just be possible. So open source is here with
that stuff and it's staying, I'm telling you. So we got that one. And again, the link is there.
So let's have a look at who's actually doing that. So I had a look at some GitHub stats.
So Yoast is the Swintest tool and actually quite old tool. So there are 10 people. Just again,
it's a random month, it's the last month roughly. So 10 people working there. So that's a healthy
community of people adding things. It's not a huge community. And this is a thing we'll see
repeating very later, the simulation tool. 20 people in the last month pushing and doing stuff.
CocoaDB, not that many people but still. The Skywater PDK, now that's the manual effectively
of your PDK. And that doesn't see that many changes. And I think that's one of the areas where
more people could get involved and actually where we have as a community more to figure out because
that description, that PDK is not complete and not error free. Like in any document that you write,
there are probably going to be errors. So we're still looking for more ways how to get people
involved and fix those kind of even small errors. So OpenLane, we've seen that flow.
Recently active as well. We've come OpenRoad, which is within OpenLane, they always make it
like sound similar. But OpenRoad is kind of the majority of those physical design tools and
bundling them together. What OpenRoad has an idea, it was funded by DARPA. And the idea is to be able
to go from an RTL to a GDS2 in 24 hours with no human in the loop, which is something very
different from the normal hardware world where you always have tools that are, well, you can
put it in two ways. You can say the tools are too crappy, so you need to go manually in and fix some
stuff in the way. Or you say the tools are good enough and you just need that human to actually
give it that special touch because hardware is just so difficult. It feels like at times
when you set a compiler isn't exactly good enough to actually really compile my software. So at
times I just go in and just do a bit of hand assembly editing because there's corners like
around memory accesses. So they just need a bit of manual work. So that's how hardware design
works. And that's what they want to change is just make it completely automated.
Just for comparison, this is how things on the Linux kernel would look. So the hardware
community is significantly slow, smaller than the software community. And that's why Ruby,
for example, is funding some of these things. Finding hardware engineers is quite tricky. And
there's just tons of software engineers and tons of good ideas that have been explored and tried
in the software world. So we want to bring that to hardware as well and make it accessible there.
We'll look at very later. And we also see more and more chip designs being submitted to OpenMPW.
So that's the free, as in cost, shuttle program where you can just submit your designs.
So whenever somebody learns, typically by themselves, how to do a chip design and then
submit it, it kind of shows up in that graph. So there have been eight free of those manufacturing
runs now. And there is more to come. The first chips are back. So the MPW1 chips. You see this
is a fair amount of lead time. It takes typically at least two and a half months, roughly, to get
chips back from fab. But then you want to test them and you want to actually potentially fix
errors. And these OpenMPW ones, since all the tooling is new, have still a fair amount of
problems in them. So bringing them up is not quite trivial. And they don't fully work.
But that's what we're learning. And that's why we kind of do that repeatedly and again and again.
So we don't need to be fully correct the first time. We just have a couple more tries.
So looking at the future, always hard. We're going to see innovation. We're going to see
change that nobody predicted. And that's the good thing about making this open source. So somebody
has an idea, can actually give it a try and just see if they can do it. Pretty much before, if you
wanted to do chip design, you had to be within a large company that did it the way they always did.
So you had to do their product, end of story. So there is no that much unpredictable innovation.
Okay. Tools getting more accessible. We can actually get access to them. And finally,
we can actually revolutionize learning about hardware. Before, when I was taking a university
course, it was kind of very boring theoretical. So you had kind of course materials from 10 years
ago from somebody who has never seen a chip being made in their life because they just actually
used the course material that they got 20 years ago. And that's just how teaching evolves. And
that's kind of the teaching we see in very many universities about hardware design. So they might
have a VHDL or Verilog course, but it's so far from reality. It's kind of not even funny.
So we can actually now learn how to do it the real way. There are some news,
letter links up there. And finally, if you actually want to take a paid for learning course
with all those open source tools, there is the zero to AC course from Mad Van. So he helped me
actually preparing some slides to have a look at that stuff. If you're looking for in-person
events, there is a lecture coming up in the US, a open source hardware conference that the Fosse
Foundation has been organizing for a number of years. And there is work off coming back after
COVID, the main open source hardware conference in Munich this year. I think we haven't announced
that very widely at September 15 and 16. And just stay for the October 1st. Just take your hotel
room a couple more days. And this is going to be a great experience. We end with a quote that I
found. An atmosphere of excitement and anticipation pervades these fields. Workers from many backgrounds,
computer scientists, electrical engineers, physics, physicists are collaborating on a common problem
area which has not yet become classical. This territory is vast and largely unexplored. The
rewards for those who simply press forward are great. See how I go around. So this was written
in 1978. And with there again with open source world, let's make this open source
ship design a reality. We have all the necessary ingredients. We have all the necessary tools.
Let's make it happen. Thank you.
Thank you.